Dying Light is one of my favorite titles from this console generation.  The
strength of its gameplay loop lied in the marriage of its visceral melee combat
and frenetic parkour, all placed neatly in a sandbox for your judo mayhem. So
to my surpise, a DLC "expansion" came out this week, well over five years after
release, themed around Techland's shelved dungeon crawler Hellraid . However,
is this new content any good? Sadly not. 

The gimmick here is that you've been teleported inside of an arcade machine
possessed by demons, and you have to fight your way through various combat
arenas to collect the three magical macguffins, all neatly framed inside of a
roguelite game mode, where you have three attempts to clear the dungeon or lose
everything. 

First things off, Hellraid is way too dark. And for some reason, when the game
takes away your equipment, it also removes your flashlight, so you can't see
anything unless you crank up the gamma, which ruins the atmosphere. 

One red flag with this "expansion" is that it's entirely focused on combat,
with little in the way of exploration or platforming. I find this to be a large
misstep since those systems were crucial to the experience of Dying Light and
to The Following DLC. 

In the base game, Harran was an expansive world. And since Crane was weak and
had no fast travel, you had to use your parkour to get around quickly and to
avoid mobs. In the process, you'd gain XP from platforming and unlock new moves
or improve your existing skills, making parkour and combat easier. So there was
this great sense of progression that encouraged you to get out there and
explore as much as you could to rack up proficiencies. There was even this
interesting dynamic with the day/night cycles, as during nighttime, viral
hurters would appear, chasing and two shotting you if you were caught. But to
compensate, any experience earned was doubled, so it was a greak risk vs.
reward incentive and created many tense chase sequences.  

The Following built upon these systems by giving you an even larger world, and
having you drive around in a broken-down buggy. The more you navigated, the
better your driving skills got, and better parts could be equipped on the
buggy. Night time chases were even recreated, as virals could rapidly sprint
after you, forcing you to drive erratically through forests and fields to break
line of sight.

So, it's unfortunate that Hellraid completely ignores these systems, removing
the risk/reward dynamic, and leaving no sense of power or player progression.
But given how small the dungeons are in this expansion, I don't think there was
any meaningful way to create a new skill tree that could translate over into
the base game or to the following. 

That said, I don't see why there couldn't have been parkour challenges within
the dungeon. It'd break up the flow of combat and test the skills you've
learned from the base game. Hellraid could've even been gated off to high level
players, so that Techland could've created platforming gauntlets that tested
every parkour skill you unlocked. 

Now, if the combat encounters were well designed and paced appropriately, then
I could forgive the lack of exploration, but what we got was not that. 

To Hellraid's credit, initially, fighting your way through hordes of reskinned
zombies is fun. From the allmighty dropkick to Crane's bulldozer charge,
comboing together his offensive parkour moves for crowd control and finishers
is still incredibly satisfying to pull off. However, the major problems with
combat soon arise. 

After the first encounter, all of these fights begin occuring in square open
arenas, generally with multiple floors of elevation and few natural
chokepoints. Because there are so few background objects, you can't reliably
use the environment for parkour like in the base game. Adding onto this,
every...single...fight has waves of runners and skeletal knights clown
carring in from every nook and cranny. 

On hard mode, trying to slay them in the open is borderline suicide. Skeletal
knights love to parry your melee swings and they tank blows like raid bosses
due to the garbage weapon drops. Now, I get that this encourages you to
use your mobility to open up foes to executions, but there are several problems
with this approach. First, it's not consistent as to what moves do and do not
disable enemies. My ram charge seemed to make them flinch for a bit, while the
legbreaker sometimes knocked them over. Secondly, the finisher prompt only
seems to appear about a third of the time, so I often kicked zombies instead of
executing them. This might be an issue with how hitboxes are handled in
Hellraid, since this problem is rare otherwise.  Finally, you have lengthy
setup and recovery animations for executions. And because the arenas in
Hellraid are so cramped, expect to lose a quarter of your life whenever you
perform a takedown, since you will get hit. 

Eventually, the spam got so annoying that I resorted to exploiting Dying
Light's combat system to make things more tolerable. Excluding runners,
skeletons and zombies cannot climb objects nor hit you while you're on them.
So, I always took the chance to find and perch upon a modestely sized piece of
cover, and whack at skeletons until they fell apart. Repeat for about thirty
minutes, ocassionally adding in some situational runner killing. I think enemy
spawning could've been changed in two ways for the better. First, it could be
adjusted to be gradual, rather than in waves. Therefore, you wouldn't be
overwhelmed so long as you killed enemies quickly, promoting player skill.
There also could've been environmental traps like ballistas or spike walls that
you could've used to clear out multiple mobs simultaneously, to discourage
camping and promote situational awareness. Though I think there would need to
be a small time window before enemies spawned in so you could find these traps.

Another option would be to keep the spam, but to turn the room into a chase
sequence rather than an arena. Therefore, you wouldn't be expected to kill
everyone, but to use your parkour skills to get away to the next room before
getting overwhelmed. This would, in part, recreate some of the tension and fear
from the viral chases in the base game.

Now, let's talk about mages, the worst enemy type introduced in Hellraid.
Individually, they're not that awful, as the fireballs are slow enough to
dodge. However, you only fight a single caster once, as the game decides to
spam them alongside skeletal knights, torturer minibosses, and runners for the
rest of the experience. So now, not only do you need to deal with the
frustrating fodder spam, you need to deal with constant spell barrages.  And
even if you get into melee range with casters, they can still hadouken blast
you in the face, taking out a quarter of your life. Oh, and for the cherry on
top, they move erratically, so it's hard to reliably hit them.

Ultimately, I gave up on hard mode when the game decided to respawn me at the
first room of the dungeon after I died, but not reset the script triggers or
keep the pathways open. As a result, I couldn't retread my steps or progress at
all and I was completely stuck. Now, if Hellraid mixed up enemy spawns and had
any  procedural level or tile arrangement to keep things fresh, I wouldn't mind
giving it a go another. But between the fixed level progression and complete
inability to save, exit, and resume your run at a later time, I had little
patience to play on hard again. 

So I decided to start on normal difficulty, which changes the entire
experience. Instead of a frustrating cheesefest, the game becomes a
mindnumbingly dull cakewalk, as you can button mash your way to victory.
Enemies get stunlocked easier and take far less blows to kill, so you don't
need to use your mobility or executions to dispatch foes. Furthermore, you take
far less damage, so it's trivial to shrug off most foes, especially when the
game liberally throws healing potions at you.  And paradoxically, you get
better rarity weapons on this difficulty than on hard, as I only got one or two
rares on each of those runs, whereas I was drowning in purples on normal. 

Really, the only parts of normal where things got remotely difficult is at the
end of Hellraid, where any semblance of encounter design is thrown out of the
window. Here, you're fighting in a small circular arenas with no cover outside
of some small banisters and seemingly unclimable bandstands.  Dozens upon
dozens of runners, skeletal knights, and torturers swarm in on your location.
And on top of that, there are always about half a dozen spellcasters spamming
fireballs at you. At some point, you're going to get overwhelmed by the sheer
volume and get stunlocked. I've played bullet hell shooters less insane than
this.

And to top it all off, the "epic showdown" with the minotaur is just a fight
with a reskinned demolisher from the base game. Bait his highly telegraphed
charges, whack at him a few times, rinse and repeat.  Congratulations, you just
beat Hellraid. 

So, what are your rewards for clearing ba'al's "legendary" dungeon? A common
weapon, 2 health potions, and a couple hundred Hellraid funbucks to help you
grind more. 

Techland, this is pathetic. I know you can do better.  The only silver lining
free content updates in the future. And given that Techland's been regularly
patching the game for over 5 and a half years now, I'm inclined to believe
them. But if there's any chance of salvaging this DLC, the developers need to
go back to the drawing board and fundamentally rethink the overall design,
because there's barely anything worth salvaging here right now. 

Thank you all very much for watching. I'd like to give special thanks to Cribbs
for taking a look at my script and giving feedback on it. As for the schedule
of content, I've hit a bit of writer's block with the DOOM Eternal script, so
it was on hold for a bit. Ditto with Borderlands 3, though I did make some good
progress on that one. I've also got a special project in the works for Age of
Empires 3, though I'll officially announce it when it's looking more complete.
If you'd like to stay up to date on channel news, you can follow me on Twitter
@SquidTheSid1 or join the Squidcord discord server.  Finally, if you'd like to
help out the channel financially in these tough times, consider subscribing to
my Patreon page over at Patreon.com/SquidTheSid if you can afford to do so.

As always,

Stay Frosty. 
